Beginner's Guide to Adding Devices (#4411)
OttoWinter/esphomedocs: guides/beginners_guide_adding_devices.rst

Beginner's Guide to Adding Devices
==================================

.. seo::
    :description: A step-by-step beginner's guide to adding device YAMLs to ESPHome in a running Docker container, with detailed instructions and pictures.
    :image: docker-mark-blue.svg

This guide is for people who are not so tech-orientated but wish to get their feet wet with ESPHome.

.. note::

    ESPHome devices usually rely on Home Assistant.  It's more than just an excellent way to control and automate your home.
    It can also manage many IoT devices.  Read more about `Home Assistant <https://www.home-assistant.io/>`__.

    If you are already running Home Assistant, check out :doc:`getting_started_hassio` to run ESPHome as an add-on.
    
    If running Home Assistant in Docker, get ESPHome by following instructions in the first part of :doc:`getting_started_command_line`.

    Or if not running Docker or Home Assistant at all, you can try :doc:`beginners_guide_docker_desktop`.

Setting up your Secrets
-----------------------

> The first thing you should do is edit your ``Secrets`` file. This contains reusable elements that you can "hide" from the main ESPHome GUI.

Reviewer: > This guide is for people who are not so tech-orientated but wish to get their feet wet with ESPHome.

What are "secrets"? Why do I need them? What is an example of something that should be considered a "secret"?

Author: Good point.

> Also, it allows you to copy and paste YAMLs from your own code to share with others (and vice versa) without the worry of leaking details about your home network.

Reviewer: Maybe swap this with the line above -- provide context, _then_ talk about editing the secrets file.

Author: Considered carefully and edited... included a bit more about WHY to use a secrets file.

    ap_password: "<MY_AP_PASSWORD>" # Super-secret!

These are the 3 most basic secrets. The wireless network name is set by ``wifi_ssid`` and the password is set by ``wifi_password``.
Actually, the names ``wifi_ssid``, ``wifi_password`` are arbitrary.  You could just as easily use ``home_wifi``, ``home_password`` if you like.
But ``wifi_ssid``, ``wifi_password``, and ``ap_password`` are commonly used in the community.

Finally, ``ap_password`` sets a password for the hotspot that an ESPHome device creates when it cannot find the wireless network.

.. note::

    Please note in the above example, I have included comments with the ``#`` character.  Comments can be added as their own lines or at the end of lines.
    Anything in the line after the ``#`` are ignored.  Often, comments can be used to explain what a particular section of code is doing.

.. warning::

    Although it is theoretically possible to use a 5Ghz or 6Ghz wireless network, there are not many ESP-based devices that actually support those ranges.
    Most known devices only support the 2.4Ghz range. In best practice, it is recommended that your wireless network frequencies have different names,

>     for example, "MyWifi" for 2.4Ghz and "MyWifi5G" for 5Ghz.

Reviewer 2: is this really recommended to name the SSID's different? then it wouldn't be possible to "roam" between 2.4GHz and 5GHz easily

Author: Well, it might be.  But it's a divided issue and if sorting out issues, this is often recommended.  But, point noted and I'll add a bit more here.

  https://www.reddit.com/r/HomeNetworking/comments/197o4f7/is_it_still_better_to_have_different_ssids_for/

Reviewer: We should not recommend one way or the other.

I'll spare you the details but (personally and as a former network/Wi-Fi admin) I absolutely _despise_ when people split their Wi-Fi networks into separate SSIDs for 2.4, 5 and now 6 GHz -- I avoid doing so at all costs/it's a last resort. As far as ESPs are concerned, they lack the hardware to even "see" 5 or 6 GHz so there is really no reason to worry about them roaming/attempting to roam onto these frequencies, anyway. I've been using a single SSID for all frequencies here (2.4, 5 and 6 GHz) for years with nearly 60 ESPs and I've got no connectivity issues with any of them at all.

That said, I've got no issues with creating a separate "IoT" SSID/VLAN (there are good reasons to do this) -- it's arguably a good practice. 🙂

Reviewer: > I put all of my bands on the same SSID and let the clients decide. I’ve created an additional single-band SSID for difficult clients that refuse to connect or frequently drop connections.

I think this is the best advice. If you need a "compatibility" SSID for poorly-behaving clients, just do that -- I have that here, as well. But don't break apart all of your SSIDs for all clients just because a couple of them are misbehaving.

Author: How about this:

Although it is theoretically possible for an ESP-based device to use a 5Ghz or 6Ghz wireless network, there are not many ESP-based devices that actually support those ranges. Most ESP-based devices only support the 2.4Ghz range. Although you should have no issues using the same SSID name for 2.4Ghz and 5Ghz, if you encounter any issues with a device maintaining its connection, you may want to consider using a different SSID name or guest network on the 2.4Ghz band for your IOT devices.

Reviewer 2: > if you encounter any issues with a device maintaining its connection, you may want to consider using a different SSID name or guest network on the 2.4Ghz band for your IOT devices **(, that have connection problems)**.

Author: Not sure where the other compare went.  But I accepted your suggesting as "Short & concise and link for issues.  Good."

Linking to another place for help clears it up a lot.

    :alt: Code snippet for Athom-E27-7W-Bulb with a circle around "Copy"

Thankfully, this page has a button we can click "Copy" and just copy the entire YAML from the template.  Click "Copy".

Go back to the ESPHome Dashboard and use your mouse to move your cursor to the end of the file.
Create a marker like ``#-----`` (``#`` means it's a comment) and a few extra lines and make sure your cursor is at the first column like this.

.. figure:: images/noob_dashboard_3d.gif
    :align: center
    :width: 95.0%
    :alt: ESPHome Dashboard editor, opened to "livingroom-light.yaml"

And then paste what you just copied.

.. note::

    Hotkeys are very useful when working with plain text.  Get to know them and you will have an easier time with YAML files.

    .. tabs::

        .. tab:: Windows

            **Copy**  : ``Ctrl + C``

            **Paste** : ``Ctrl + V``

            **Cut**   : ``Ctrl + X``

            **Undo**  : ``Ctrl + Z``

            **Redo**  : ``Ctrl + Y``

        .. tab:: Linux

            **Copy**  : ``Ctrl + Shift + C``

            **Paste** : ``Ctrl + Shift + V``

            **Cut**   : ``Ctrl + Shift + X``

            **Undo**  : ``Ctrl + Z``

>             **Redo**  : ``Ctrl + Shift + Y``

Reviewer 2: maybe put the `Shift` into `(Shift)`. Often (not always) `Shift` isn't needed on linux

Author: Well, if that's the case, I can just rename the tabs.

Reviewer 2: merge Windows and Linux or what do you mean?

Author: I mean I made "Windows" into "Windows / Linux" and made that tab "Other Linux."  Linux users should be knowledgeable enough to know which one is theirs.

Perhaps you have two identical bulbs and you want to name them differently.  Just change it to something like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

    substitutions:
      device_name: "living-room-light"
      friendly_name: "Living Room Light"
      project_name: "athom.rgbww-light"
      project_version: "1.0"

Substitutions are incredible common among YAMLs you find online and they're almost always placed at the top.

  .. collapse:: The Order of Sections

      For almost every other section of a YAML, it's not strictly important what is higher or lower than another.
      It's useful to know that they are processed in order but sometimes you will see various sections in a much different arrangement
      than what we see here.  But almost always, ``substitutions`` is at the top and ``esphome`` is not far below.

esphome:
^^^^^^^^

Next, let's look at the ``esphome`` section and which is immediately after and see what the substitutions do.

.. code-block:: yaml

    esphome:
      name: "${device_name}"
      name_add_mac_suffix: true
      platform: ESP8266
      board: esp8285
      project:
        name: "${project_name}"

>         version: "${project_version}"

Reviewer: This syntax is outdated and won't be supported after this (February) release. See https://github.com/esphome/esphome/pull/8118

Do not use the 8266 in examples for new documentation. Use a more modern chip such as an ESP32 or supported variant.

Author: Oh, indeed.  I knew that too as I personally use the "new" way in all my YAMLs.  Switching to ESP32 is probably a good idea as well.

I'll see if I can link to the "boards" list in here as well.

.. figure:: images/noob_dashboard_3e.png
    :align: center
    :width: 50.0%

It adds 3 digits from the hardware's MAC (the serial number of the Wireless interface).  It's useful when flashing multiple devices
with the same hardware and similar (but not the same) names.  Usually it's best to delete this line.

So, we should have this now:

.. code-block:: yaml

    esphome:
      name: "${device_name}"
      platform: ESP8266
      board: esp8285
      project:
        name: "${project_name}"
        version: "${project_version}"

api:
^^^^

Sometimes sections are blank but absolutely crucial they are present.  This next bit is one of them.

.. code-block:: yaml

    api:

This tells the device that it will be communicating with `Home Assistant API <https://esphome.io/components/api.html>`__.
If you are running Home Assistant, you need to keep this line, but go back above the ``#-----`` we made earlier and
and copy and paste the encryption key that was generated when the initial YAML was made, so we end up with something like:

.. code-block:: yaml

    api:
      encryption:
        key: "LTNtifZwDD+mxodyTiIfjQBTv22itLtmVLE+gFdGmCo="

> 

Author: Fixed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    mqtt_broker: "<MQTT_IP_ADDRESS>"
    mqtt_name: "<MQTTUSER>"
    mqtt_password: "<MQTTPASSWORD>"

These lines regard the MQTT (Message Queue Telemetry Transport) protocol.
MQTT is a lightweight, publish-subscribe-based messaging protocol that is commonly used in IoT devices.
The ``mqtt_broker`` is the IP address of the MQTT server and the ``mqtt_name`` and ``mqtt_password``
are the username and password.
If you are not running an MQTT server, you do not need to add these to your secrets yet.

Save
****

Don't forget to click ``Save`` when finished editing.

.. figure:: images/noob_dashboard_1b.png
    :align: center
    :width: 95.0%
    :alt: ESPHome Dashboard Secrets window with circle around "Save"

Then you can close the Secrets.

.. figure:: images/noob_dashboard_1c.png
    :align: center
    :width: 95.0%
    :alt: ESPHome Dashboard Secrets window with circle around "X"

Adding a Device
---------------

This example (and everything below) will use
`Athom-E27-7W-Bulb <https://devices.esphome.io/devices/Athom-E27-7W-Bulb>`__ as an example
because it illustrates the basic principals of an ESPHome Configuration and the community's usual/best practices.

> Your first use-case will surely be different but the principles will be the same.

Author: All suggestions taken.

    and sometimes what you find by searching may not always be up-to-date for the latest version of ESPHome.
    The community is always improving the documentation but there are often discrepancies.
    By the time you read this, it's possible some things here may be out-of-date.  It's always best to search
    :doc:`ESPHome.io </index>` if something is giving you trouble,
    the `Home Assistant forums <https://community.home-assistant.io/c/esphome/36>`__,
    ESPHome on `Discord <https://discord.com/invite/KhAMKrd>`__,
    or search the `Reddit sub <https://www.reddit.com/r/Esphome/>`__.

Adding the Device to ESPHome
****************************

First, click "New Device."  When you have no devices, it will look like this.

.. figure:: images/noob_dashboard_2a.png
    :align: center
    :width: 95.0%
    :alt: ESPHome Dashboard with no devices and circles around both "New Device" buttons

Give the device a name. For the example, let's call it "livingroom-light".
The device name should be informative and unique because each and every device
in ESPHome will get it's own YAML file.  It's totally up to you how to name it.
After naming it, click "Next".

> 

Author: All suggestions taken.

esphome:
^^^^^^^^

Next, let's look at the ``esphome`` section and which is immediately after and see what the substitutions do.

.. code-block:: yaml

    esphome:
      name: "${device_name}"
      name_add_mac_suffix: true
      platform: ESP8266
      board: esp8285
      project:
        name: "${project_name}"
        version: "${project_version}"

Wherever you see a dollar-sign ``$`` followed by a variable name, it's a substitution.
In this way, we can easily change the name of the device and the project.
The ``device_name`` may also be needed later in the YAML and it could be pretty irritating to search
every time you copy and paste a YAML for a new device.
In some cases, too, you may see hardware settings or other options defined in the substitutions section
so that you don't have to search for it to change it.

  .. collapse:: Note About Curly Brackets

      Note that usually curly brackets ``{$device_name}`` are usually used when calling the substitution,
      although sometimes you may see substitutions that do not use curly brackets like ``$device_name``.

>       Both are acceptable but curly brackets are used to avoid errors so it's best to use curly brackets.

Author: Fixing now.

    :align: center
    :width: 50.0%

It adds 3 digits from the hardware's MAC (the serial number of the Wireless interface).
It's useful when flashing multiple devices with the same hardware and similar (but not the same) names.
You may prefer to have a plain name, in which case, delete this line.

So, we should have this now:

.. code-block:: yaml

    esphome:
      name: "${device_name}"
      project:
        name: "${project_name}"
        version: "${project_version}"

esp8266 / esp32:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Usually, immediately following the ``esphome`` section will be your platform and board.
For the purposes of our Athom bulb, we will need this section:

.. code-block:: yaml

    esp8266:
      board: esp8285

In some cases, rather than using an ESP8266, you may need to specify ESP32 like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

    esp32:
      board: esp32dev

It is critically important to know which platform you are working with.  ESP8266 and ESP32 are completely different.
Code for one will not work on the other.

It is also important to know which board you are working with, as many boards have different hardware configurations,
especially differing in flash memory sizes.

> But in most cases, when dealing with ESP8266, it is ``esp8255`` or sometimes ``esp12e`` (which has only 1M of flash memory).

Author: Fixing now.

Beginner's Guide to Adding Devices
==================================

.. seo::
    :description: A step-by-step beginner's guide to adding device YAMLs to ESPHome in a running Docker container, with detailed instructions and pictures.
    :image: docker-mark-blue.svg

This guide is for people who are unfamiliar with ESPHome and wish to learn the basics.

.. note::

    ESPHome devices usually rely on Home Assistant.  It's more than just an excellent way to control and automate your
    home. It can also manage many IoT devices.  Read more about `Home Assistant <https://www.home-assistant.io/>`__.

    If you are already running Home Assistant, check out :doc:`getting_started_hassio` to run ESPHome as an add-on.
    
    If running Home Assistant in Docker, get ESPHome by following instructions in the first part of
    :doc:`getting_started_command_line`.

    Or if not running Docker or Home Assistant at all, you can try :doc:`beginners_guide_docker_desktop`.

Setting up your Secrets
-----------------------

> A ``Secrets`` file can be used to hold things that you wish to remain secret. So, you can copy and paste a YAML
> from your own code to share with others, without the worry of leaking details about your home network, such as your
> SSID name and password.
> 
> These elements can be re-used in all of your YAMLs, so it also makes copying and pasting YAML code from other
> sources (such as Github) much easier as well.

Reviewer: Don't use words like "things", "stuff" and even "ones". It's not specifically bad but it's a bit too...informal. Sentences also should not start with "so".

```suggestion
The ``secrets.yaml`` file is where you'll store information that you don't want to accidentally share or otherwise
hard-code into your device's YAML configuration file(s). It's also useful because it provides a single place in which
to store common values; this way, if you need to change one of them, you won't need to update every individual device's
file, which can save you a lot of time when you have many devices!

When you keep these secret values in a separate file, you can confidently copy and paste YAML from your files and share
it with others. You don't need to worry about accidentally sharing the details of your home network, such as your Wi-Fi
SSID name and password.
```

Author: I like your changes.  You're right about informal language.

    :width: 95.0%
    :alt: ESPHome Dashboard window with circle around "Secrets"

Wi-Fi Network
*************

Add the next 4 lines, replacing the placeholders with your own values.

.. code-block:: yaml

    # My Wi-Fi SSID and password
    wifi_ssid: "<MY_WIFI_NAME>"
    wifi_password: "<MY_WIFI_PASSWORD>"
    ap_password: "<MY_AP_PASSWORD>" # Super-secret!

These are the 3 most basic secrets. The wireless network name is set by ``wifi_ssid`` and the password 
is set by ``wifi_password``. Actually, the names ``wifi_ssid``, ``wifi_password`` are arbitrary.
You could just as easily use ``home_wifi``, ``home_password`` if you like.
But ``wifi_ssid``, ``wifi_password``, and ``ap_password`` are commonly used in the community.

Finally, ``ap_password`` sets a password for the hotspot that an ESPHome device creates when it cannot
find the wireless network.

.. note::

    Please note in the above example, I have included comments with the ``#`` character.  Comments can be
    added as their own lines or at the end of lines.
    Anything in the line after the ``#`` are ignored.
    Often, comments can be used to explain what a particular section of code is doing.

.. warning::

>     Although it is theoretically possible for an ESP-based device to use a 5Ghz or 6Ghz wireless network,
>     there are not many ESP-based devices that actually support those ranges.
>     Most ESP-based devices only support the 2.4Ghz range.
>     Although you should have no issues using the same SSID name for 2.4Ghz and 5Ghz, if you encounter any issues
>     with a device maintaining its connection, you may want to consider using a different SSID name
>     or guest network on the 2.4Ghz band for your IOT devices.

Reviewer: Let's be very careful with our words here so as to not create any confusion. Theoretically possible, yes, but..."not many"? Other than the C5--which is brand-new and I'm not even sure is readily available yet--which ESPs support frequencies other than 2.4 GHz? 😇

```suggestion
    Supported Espressif microcontrollers only support the 2.4 Ghz frequency range for Wi-Fi.

    If you're experiencing connectivity issues, see our :ref:`FAQ <wifi-problems>`.
```
